Isolate examples documentation (#5332)
dart-lang/site-www: src/language/isolates.md

[`Isolate.spawn()`]: {{site.dart-api}}/{{site.data.pkg-vers.SDK.channel}}/dart-isolate/Isolate/spawn.html
[`ReceivePort`]: {{site.dart-api}}/{{site.data.pkg-vers.SDK.channel}}/dart-isolate/ReceivePort-class.html
[`SendPort`]: {{site.dart-api}}/{{site.data.pkg-vers.SDK.channel}}/dart-isolate/SendPort-class.html
[`SendPort.send()` method]: {{site.dart-api}}/{{site.data.pkg-vers.SDK.channel}}/dart-isolate/SendPort/send.html
[main isolate]: /language/concurrency#isolates

### `ReceivePort` and `SendPort`

Setting up long-lived communication between isolates requires
two classes (in addition to `Isolate`): `ReceivePort` and `SendPort`.
These ports are the only way isolates can communicate with each other.

A `ReceivePort` is an object that handles messages that are sent from other
isolates. Those messages are sent via a `SendPort`.

{{site.alert.note}}
`SendPort` objects are associated with exactly one `ReceivePort`,
but a single `ReceivePort` can have many `SendPorts`.
The `ReceivePort` creates a `SendPort` when it is created itself.
You can create new `SendPorts` that
can send messages to an existing `ReceivePort`.

> {{site.alert.note}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{site.alert.end}}
```

This will fix the nested notes, I think

- First, create the `RawReceivePort`. This `ReceivePort` is only responsible for
  receiving the initial message from the worker isolate, which will be
  a `SendPort`.
- Next, create a `Completer` that will indicate when the isolate is ready to
  receive messages. When this completes, it will return a record with
  a `ReceivePort` and a `SendPort`.
- Next, define the `RawReceivePort.handler` property. This property is
  a `Function?` that behaves like `ReceivePort.listener`. The function is called
  when a message is received by this port.
- Within the handler function, call `isolateReady.complete()`. This expects
  a [record][] with a `ReceivePort` and a `SendPort` as an argument.
  The `SendPort` is the initial message sent from the worker isolate, which will
  be assigned in the next step to the class level `SendPort` called `_commands`.
  For the `ReceivePort`, create a new `ReceivePort` with
  the `ReceivePort.fromRawReceivePort` constructor, and pass in
  the `startupPort`.

<?code-excerpt "lib/robust_ports_example/spawn_1.dart"?>
```dart
class Worker {
  final SendPort _commands;
  final ReceivePort _responses;

  static Future<Worker> spawn() async {

>     // Create a receive port and add it's initial message handler

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Create a receive port and add it's initial message handler.
```
Fix in code file too

    final initPort = RawReceivePort();
    final connection = Completer<(ReceivePort, SendPort)>.sync();
    initPort.handler = (initialMessage) {
      final commandPort = initialMessage as SendPort;
      connection.complete((
        ReceivePort.fromRawReceivePort(initPort),
        commandPort,
      ));
    };
// ···
  }
```

By creating a `RawReceivePort` first, and then a `ReceivePort`, you’ll be able
to add a new callback to `ReceivePort.listen` later on. Conversely, if you were
to create a `ReceivePort` straight away, you’d only be able to add
one `listener`, because `ReceivePort` implements [`Stream`][], rather
than [`BroadcastStream`][].

Effectively, this allows you to separate your isolate start-up logic from the
logic that handles receiving messages after setting up communication is
complete. This benefit will become more obvious as the logic in the other
methods grows.

> #### Step 3: Spawn a worker isolate with `Isolate.spawn`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Step 3: Spawn a worker isolate with `Isolate.spawn`
```

This step continues to fill in the `Worker.spawn` method. You’ll add the code
needed to spawn an isolate, and return an instance of `Worker` from this class.
In this example, the call to `Isolate.spawn` is wrapped in
a [`try`/`catch` block][], which ensures that, if the isolate fails to start up,
the `startupPort` will be closed, and the `Worker` object won’t be created.

- First, declare a variable called `isolate`, and attempt to spawn a worker
  isolate in a `try`/`catch` block. If spawning a worker isolate fails, close
  the receive port that was created in the previous step. The method passed
  to `Isolate.spawn` will be covered in a later step.
- Next, await the `isolateReady.future`, and destructure the send port and
  receive port from the record it returns.
- Finally, return an instance of `Worker` by calling its private constructor,
  and passing in the ports from that completer.

<?code-excerpt "lib/robust_ports_example/spawn_2.dart"?>
```dart
class Worker {
  final SendPort _commands;
  final ReceivePort _responses;

  static Future<Worker> spawn() async {

>     // Create a receive port and add it's initial message handler

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Create a receive port and add its initial message handler.
```
Fix in code file too

    final initPort = RawReceivePort();
    final connection = Completer<(ReceivePort, SendPort)>.sync();
    initPort.handler = (initialMessage) {
      final commandPort = initialMessage as SendPort;
      connection.complete((
        ReceivePort.fromRawReceivePort(initPort),
        commandPort,
      ));
    };

>     // Spawn the isolate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Spawn the isolate.
```
Fix in code file too

    try {
      await Isolate.spawn(_startRemoteIsolate, (initPort.sendPort));
    } on Object {
      initPort.close();
      rethrow;
    }

    final (ReceivePort receivePort, SendPort sendPort) =
        await connection.future;

    return Worker._(sendPort, receivePort);
  }
```

Note that in this example (compared to the [previous example][]), `Worker.spawn`
acts as an asynchronous static constructor for this class and is the only way to
create an instance of `Worker`. This simplifies the API, making the code that

> will create an instance of Worker cleaner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
creates an instance of `Worker` cleaner.
```

#### Step 4: Complete the isolate setup process

In this step, you will complete the basic isolate setup process. This correlates
almost entirely to the [previous example][], and there are no new concepts.

> There is a slight change in that the code is broken into more methods, which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a slight change in that the code is broken into more methods, which
is a design practice that
```

<?code-excerpt "lib/robust_ports_example/step_4.dart (handle-commands)"?>
```dart
static void _handleCommandsToIsolate(
    ReceivePort receivePort, SendPort sendPort) {
  receivePort.listen((message) {
    try {
      final jsonData = jsonDecode(message as String);
      sendPort.send(jsonData);
    } catch (e) {
      sendPort.send(RemoteError(e.toString(), ''));
    }
  });
}
```

Next, add the code for the `_handleResponsesFromIsolate` method.

- First, check if the message is a `RemoteError`, in which case you
  should `throw` that error.
- Otherwise, print the message. In future steps, you will update this code to
  return messages rather than print them.

<?code-excerpt "lib/robust_ports_example/step_4.dart (handle-response)"?>
```dart
void _handleResponsesFromIsolate(dynamic message) {
  if (message is RemoteError) {
    throw message;
  } else {
    print(message);
  }
}
```

Finally, add the `parseJson` method, which is a public method that allows
outside code to send JSON to the worker isolate to be decoded.

<?code-excerpt "lib/robust_ports_example/step_4.dart (parse-json)"?>
```dart
Future<Object?> parseJson(String message) async {
  _commands.send(message);
}
```

> This method will be updated in the next step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will update this method in the next step.
```

#### Step 5: Handle multiple messages at the same time

Currently, if you rapidly send messages to the worker isolate, the isolate will
send the decoded json response in _the order that they complete_, rather than
the order that they’re sent. You have no way to determine which response
corresponds to which message.

In this step, you’ll fix this problem by giving each message an id, and
using `Completer` objects to ensure that when outside code calls `parseJson` the
response that is returned to that caller is the correct response.

First, add two class-level properties to `Worker`:

- `Map<int, Completer<Object?>> _activeRequests`
- `int _idCounter`

<?code-excerpt "lib/robust_ports_example/step_5_add_completers.dart (vars)"?>
```dart
class Worker {
  final SendPort _commands;
  final ReceivePort _responses;
  final Map<int, Completer<Object?>> _activeRequests = {};
  int _idCounter = 0;
```

> The `_activeRequests` map will associate a message sent to the worker isolate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `_activeRequests` map associates a message sent to the worker isolate
```

with a `Completer`. The keys used in `_activeRequests` are taken

> from `_idCounter`, which will be increased as more messages are sent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from `_idCounter`, which increases as more messages are sent.
```

Next, update the `parseJson` method to create completers before it sends
messages to the worker isolate.

- First create a `Completer`.
- Next, increment `_idCounter`, so that each `Completer` is associated with a
  unique number.
- Add an entry to the `_activeRequests` map in which the key is the current
  number of `_idCounter`, and the completer is the value.
- Send the message to the worker isolate, along with the id. Because you can
  only send one value through the `SendPort`, wrap the id and message in a

>   record.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [record][].
```

    } catch (e) {
      sendPort.send((id, RemoteError(e.toString(), '')));
    }
  });
}
```

Finally, update the `_handleResponsesFromIsolate`.

- First, destructure the id and the response from the message argument again.
- Then, remove the completer that corresponds to this request from
  the `_activeRequests` map.
- Lastly, rather than throwing an error or printing the decoded json, complete
  the completer, passing in the response. When this completes, the response will
  be returned to the code that called `parseJson` on the main isolate.

<?code-excerpt "lib/robust_ports_example/step_5_add_completers.dart (handle-response)"?>
```dart
void _handleResponsesFromIsolate(dynamic message) {
  final (int id, Object? response) = message as (int, Object?); // New
  final completer = _activeRequests.remove(id)!; // New

  if (response is RemoteError) {
    completer.completeError(response); // Updated
  } else {
    completer.complete(response); // Updated
  }
}
```

#### Step 6: Add functionality to close the ports

When the isolate is no longer being used by your code, you should close the
ports on the main isolate and the worker isolate.

> First, add a class-level boolean that tracks if the ports are closed.
> 
> Then, add the `Worker.close` method. Within this method:
> Update `_closed` to be true. Send a final message to the worker isolate. This
> message is a `String` that reads “shutdown”. This isn’t a specific string, and
> it could be any object you’d like. It will be used in the next code snippet.
> Finally, check if `_activeRequests` is empty. If it is, close down the main
> isolate’s `ReceivePort` called `_responses`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- First, add a class-level boolean that tracks if the ports are closed.
- Then, add the `Worker.close` method. Within this method:
  - Update `_closed` to be true.
  - Send a final message to the worker isolate.
    This message is a `String` that reads “shutdown”,
    but it could be any object you’d like.
    You will use it in the next code snippet.
- Finally, check if `_activeRequests` is empty. If it is, close down the main
  isolate’s `ReceivePort` named `_responses`.
```
The long paragraph is formatted kind of weird, so I made the whole section match the rest of the sections (double check that the sub-bullet layers render properly)

<?code-excerpt "lib/robust_ports_example/step_6_close_ports.dart (close)"?>
```dart
class Worker {
  bool _closed = false;
// ···
  void close() {
    if (!_closed) {
      _closed = true;
      _commands.send('shutdown');
      if (_activeRequests.isEmpty) _responses.close();
      print('--- port closed --- ');
    }
  }
```

> Next, you need to handle the “shutdown” message in the worker isolate. Add the
> following code to the `_handleCommandsToIsolate` method. This code will check if
> the message is a `String` that reads “shutdown”. If it is, it will close the
> worker isolate’s `ReceivePort`, and return.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Next, you need to handle the “shutdown” message in the worker isolate. Add the
  following code to the `_handleCommandsToIsolate` method. This code will check if
  the message is a `String` that reads “shutdown”. If it is, it will close the
  worker isolate’s `ReceivePort`, and return.
```

<?code-excerpt "lib/robust_ports_example/step_6_close_ports.dart (handle-commands)"?>
```dart
static void _handleCommandsToIsolate(
  ReceivePort receivePort,
  SendPort sendPort,
) {
  receivePort.listen((message) {

>     // New if-block

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // New if-block.
```
fix in code file too

    if (message == 'shutdown') {
      receivePort.close();
      return;
    }
    final (int id, String jsonText) = message as (int, String);
    try {
      final jsonData = jsonDecode(jsonText);
      sendPort.send((id, jsonData));
    } catch (e) {
      sendPort.send((id, RemoteError(e.toString(), '')));
    }
  });
}
```

> Finally, you should add code to check if the ports are closed before trying to
> send messages. Add one line in the `Worker.parseJson` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Finally, you should add code to check if the ports are closed before trying to
  send messages. Add one line in the `Worker.parseJson` method.
```

<?code-excerpt "lib/robust_ports_example/step_6_close_ports.dart (parse-json)"?>
```dart
Future<Object?> parseJson(String message) async {
  if (_closed) throw StateError('Closed'); // New
  final completer = Completer<Object?>.sync();
  final id = _idCounter++;
  _activeRequests[id] = completer;
  _commands.send((id, message));
  return await completer.future;
}
```

#### Complete example

<details>

>   <summary>Expand here to see full example</summary>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <summary>Expand here to see the full example</summary>
```

[`Isolate.spawn()`]: {{site.dart-api}}/{{site.data.pkg-vers.SDK.channel}}/dart-isolate/Isolate/spawn.html
[`ReceivePort`]: {{site.dart-api}}/{{site.data.pkg-vers.SDK.channel}}/dart-isolate/ReceivePort-class.html
[`SendPort`]: {{site.dart-api}}/{{site.data.pkg-vers.SDK.channel}}/dart-isolate/SendPort-class.html
[`SendPort.send()` method]: {{site.dart-api}}/{{site.data.pkg-vers.SDK.channel}}
/dart-isolate/SendPort/send.html

### ReceivePorts and SendPorts

This long-lived communication between isolates is set up with two classes (in addition to Isolate): ReceivePort and SendPort. These ports are the only way isolates can communicate with each other.

Ports behave similarly to Streams, in which the StreamController or Sink is 
created in one isolate, and the listener is set up in the other isolate. In 
this analogy, the StreamController is called a SendPort, and you can “add” 
messages with the [`send()` method][]. ReceivePorts are the listeners, and 
when these listeners receive a new message, they call a provided callback with the message as an argument.

[`send()` method]: {{site.dart-api}}/{{site.data.pkg-vers.SDK.channel}}
/dart-isolate/SendPort/send.html

#### Setting up ports

> Setting up a port requires a few steps, which must be done in a specific order. The following figure shows the conceptual steps required to spawn a new isolate and establish 2-way communication between it and the main isolate.

Reviewer 2: Here is a more documented version, as a gist:
https://gist.github.com/lrhn/4426e19fc3511be5b15c03c3e8960676

> Setting up a port requires a few steps, which must be done in a specific order. The following figure shows the conceptual steps required to spawn a new isolate and establish 2-way communication between it and the main isolate.

Author: This comment may address my questions/concerns from my previous reply. I wanted to say that incase you see these comments before my workday tomorrow when I have more time to go through this.  Thanks for being thorough!

---
title: Isolates
description: Information on writing isolates in Dart.
short-title: Isolates
prevpage:
  url: /language/async
  title: Asynchronous support
---

<?code-excerpt path-base="concurrency"?>

<style>
  article img {
    padding: 15px 0;
  }
</style>

This page discusses some examples that use the `Isolate` API to implement 
isolates.

Isolates are most commonly used in Flutter applications, when you 
need to perform large computations that might otherwise cause the 
UI to become unresponsive.
They’re also useful in many server-side applications. In general, 
you should use isolates whenever your application is handling computations that 
are large enough to temporarily block other computations.

While there aren't any rules about when you _must_ use isolates, here are
common situations in which you can consider using isolates:

> 

Author: Nah, makes sense to me.

[`SendPort.send()` method]: {{site.dart-api}}/{{site.data.pkg-vers.SDK.channel}}
/dart-isolate/SendPort/send.html

### ReceivePorts and SendPorts

This long-lived communication between isolates is set up with two classes (in addition to Isolate): ReceivePort and SendPort. These ports are the only way isolates can communicate with each other.

Ports behave similarly to Streams, in which the StreamController or Sink is 
created in one isolate, and the listener is set up in the other isolate. In 
this analogy, the StreamController is called a SendPort, and you can “add” 
messages with the [`send()` method][]. ReceivePorts are the listeners, and 
when these listeners receive a new message, they call a provided callback with the message as an argument.

[`send()` method]: {{site.dart-api}}/{{site.data.pkg-vers.SDK.channel}}
/dart-isolate/SendPort/send.html

#### Setting up ports

Setting up a port requires a few steps, which must be done in a specific order. The following figure shows the conceptual steps required to spawn a new isolate and establish 2-way communication between it and the main isolate.

{{site.alert.note}}

> This diagram, and the following diagram, are high-level and intended to convey the concepts necessary to use isolates, but actual implementation requires a bit more code. A full code example is shown later on this page.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The diagrams in this section are high-level and intended to convey the concept of
using ports for isolates. Actual implementation requires a bit more code,
which you will find [later on this page](link-to-ports-example-section).  
```

{{site.alert.end}}

> ![A figure showing events being fed, one by one, into the event loop](/assets/img/language/concurrency/ports-setup.png)

Reviewer: Hate to do this because the diagrams look great, but could you take the numbered list out of the diagram and just have that as text below? I think it's an accessibility thing (it's not screen readable) and also not searchable (this one and line 200, sorry!)

---
title: Isolates
description: Information on writing isolates in Dart.
short-title: Isolates
prevpage:
  url: /language/async
  title: Asynchronous support
nextpage:
  url: /null-safety

>   title: Sound Null Safety

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  title: Sound null safety
```
